
A MEAN FIELD THEORY OF LAYER IV OF VISUAL CORTEX
AND ITS APPLICATION TO ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS*
Christopher L. Scofield
Center for Neural Science and Physics Department
Brown University
Providence, Rhode Island 02912
and
Nestor, Inc., 1 Richmond Square, Providence, Rhode Island,
02906.
ABSTRACT
A single cell theory for the development of selectivity and
ocular dominance in visual cortex has been presented previously
by Bienenstock, Cooper and Munrol. This has been extended to a
network applicable to layer IV of visual cortex 2 . In this paper
we present a mean field approximation that captures in a fairly
transparent manner the qualitative, and many of the
quantitative, results of the network theory. Finally, we consider
the application of this theory to artificial neural networks and
show that a significant reduction in architectural complexity is
possible.
A SINGLE LAYER NETWORK AND THE MEAN FIELD
APPROXIMATION
We consider a single layer network of ideal neurons which
receive signals from outside of the layer and from cells within
the layer (Figure 1). The activity of the ith cell in the network is
c'1 -- m'1 d + ""'
~ T .. c'
~J J'

J

(1)

Each cell
d is a vector of afferent signals to the network.
receives input from n fibers outside of the cortical network
through the matrix of synapses mi' Intra-layer input to each cell
is then transmitted through the matrix of cortico-cortical
synapses L.
? American Institute of Physics 1988

684

Afferent
Signals

>

... ..

m2

m1

mn

~

r;.

",...-

d

.L
:

1

,~

2

... ..

, ...c.. ,

~

~

Figure 1: The general single layer recurrent
network.
Light circles are the LGN -cortical
synapses.
Dark circles are the (nonmodifiable) cortico-cortical synapses.
We now expand the response of the i th cell into individual
terms describing the number of cortical synapses traversed by
the signal d before arriving through synapses Lij at cell i.
Expanding Cj in (1), the response of cell i becomes
ci

=mi d + l: ~j mj d + l: ~jL Ljk mk d + 2: ~j 2Ljk L Lkn mn d +... (2)
J

J

K

J

K' n

Note that each term contains a factor of the form

This factor describes the first order effect, on cell q, of the
cortical transformation of the signal d.
The mean field
approximation consists of estimating this factor to be a constant,
independant of cell location
(3)

685

This assumption does not imply that each cell in the network is
selective to the same pattern, (and thus that mi = mj). Rather,
the assumption is that the vector sum is a constant

This amounts to assuming that each cell in the network is
surrounded by a population of cells which represent, on average,
all possible pattern preferences.
Thus the vector sum of the
afferent synaptic states describing these pattern preferences is a
constant independent of location.
Finally, if we assume that the lateral connection strengths are
a function only of i-j then Lij becomes a circular matrix so that

r. Lij ::: ~J Lji = Lo = constan t.
1

Then the response of the cell i becomes
(4)

for I

~

I <1

where we define the spatial average of cortical cell activity C = in
d, and N is the average number of intracortical synapses.
Here, in a manner similar to that in the theory of magnetism,
we have replaced the effect of individual cortical cells by their
average effect (as though all other cortical cells can be replaced
by an 'effective' cell, figure 2). Note that we have retained all
orders of synaptic traversal of the signal d.
Thus, we now focus on the activity of the layer after
'relaxation' to equilibrium. In the mean field approximation we
can therefore write
(5)

where the mean field

a
with

=am

686

and we asume that
inhibitory).

Afferent
Signals
d

Lo < 0 (the network is,

on

average,

>

Figure 2: The single layer mean field network.
Detailed connectivity between all cells of the
network is replaced with a single (nonmodifiable) synapse from an 'effective' cell.
LEARNING IN THE CORTICAL NETWORK

We will first consider evolution of the network according to a
synaptic modification rule that has been studied in detail, for
single cells, elsewhere!? 3.
We consider the LGN - cortical
synapses to be the site of plasticity and assume for maximum
simplicity that there is no modification of cortico-cortical
synapses. Then
(6)

.

Lij = O.
In what follows c denotes the spatial average over cortical cells,
while Cj denotes the time averaged activity of the i th cortical cell.
The function cj> has been discussed extensively elsewhere.
Here
we note that cj> describes a function of the cell response that has
both hebbian and anti-hebbian regions.

687

This leads to a very complex set of non-linear stochastic
equations that have been analyzed partially elsewhere 2 . In
general, the afferent synaptic state has fixed points that are
stable and selective and unstable fixed points that are nonselective!, 2. These arguments may now be generalized for the
network. In the mean field approximation
(7)

The mean field, a has a time dependent component m. This
varies as the average over all of the network modifiable
synapses and, in most environmental situations, should change
slowly compared to the change of the modifiable synapses to a
single cell. Then in this approximation we can write

?

(mi(a)-a) = cj>[mi(a) - a] d.

(8)

We see that there is a mapping
mi' <-> mica) - a

(9)

such that for every mj(a) there exists a corresponding (mapped)
point mj' which satisfies

the original equation for the mean field zero theory. It can be
shown 2, 4 that for every fixed point of mj( a = 0), there exists a
corresponding fixed point mj( a) with the same selectivity and
stability properties.
The fixed points are available to the
neurons if there is sufficient inhibition in the network (ILo I is
sufficiently large).
APPLICATION OF THE MEAN FIELD NETWORK TO
LAYER IV OF VISUAL CORTEX
Neurons in the primary visual cortex of normal adult cats are
sharply tuned for the orientation of an elongated slit of light and
most are activated by stimulation of either eye. Both of these
properties--orientation selectivity and binocularity--depend on
the type of visual environment experienced during a critical

688

period of early postnatal development. For example, deprivation
of patterned input during this critical period leads to loss of
orientation selectivity while monocular deprivation (MD) results
in a dramatic shift in the ocular dominance of cortical neurons
such that most will be responsive exclusively to the open eye.
The ocular dominance shift after MD is the best known and most
intensively studied type of visual cortical plasticity.
The behavior of visual cortical cells in various rearing
conditions suggests that some cells respond more rapidly to
environmental changes than others.
In monocular deprivation,
for example, some cells remain responsive to the closed eye in
spite of the very large shift of most cells to the open eye- Singer
et. al. 5 found, using intracellular recording, that geniculo-cortical
synapses on inhibitory interneurons are more resistant to
monocular deprivation than are synapses on pyramidal cell
dendrites. Recent work suggests that the density of inhibitory
GABAergic synapses in kitten striate cortex is also unaffected by
MD during the cortical period 6, 7.
These results suggest that some LGN -cortical synapses modify
rapidly, while others modify relatively slowly, with slow
modification of some cortico-cortical synapses. Excitatory LGNcortical synapses into excitatory cells may be those that modify
primarily.
To embody these facts we introduce two types of
LGN -cortical synapses:
those (mj) that modify and those (Zk)
that remain relatively constant. In a simple limit we have

and

(10)

We assume for simplicity and consistent with the above
physiological interpretation that these two types of synapses are
confined to two different classes of cells and that both left and
right eye have similar synapses (both m i or both Zk) on a given
cell. Then, for binocular cells, in the mean field approximation
(where binocular terms are in italics)

689

where dl(r) are the explicit left (right) eye time averaged signals
arriving form the LGN.
Note that a1(r) contain terms from
modifiable and non-modifiable synapses:
al(r) =

a (ml(r) + zl(r?).

Under conditions of monocular deprivation, the animal is reared
with one eye closed. For the sake of analysis assume that the
right eye is closed and that only noise-like signals arrive at
cortex from the right eye. Then the environment of the cortical
cells is:
d = (di, n)

(12)

Further, assume that the left eye synapses have reached their
1

r

selective fixed point, selective to pattern d 1 ? Then (mi' m i )
(m:*, xi) with IXil ?lm!*1.
linear analysis of the
the closed eye

<I> -

=

Following the methods of BCM, a local
function is employed to show that for

Xi =

a (1 - }..a)-li.r.

(13)

where A. = NmIN is the ratio of the number modifiable cells to the
total number of cells in the network. That is, the asymptotic
state of the closed eye synapses is a scaled function of the meanfield due to non-modifiable (inhibitory) cortical cells. The scale
of this state is set not only by the proportion of non-modifiable
cells, but in addition, by the averaged intracortical synaptic
strength Lo.
Thus contrasted with the mean field zero theory the deprived
eye LGN-cortical synapses do not go to zero.
Rather they
approach the constant value dependent on the average inhibition
produced by the non-modifiable cells in such a way that the
asymptotic output of the cortical cell is zero (it cannot be driven
by the deprived eye). However lessening the effect of inhibitory
synapses (e.g. by application of an inhibitory blocking agent such
as bicuculine) reduces the magnitude of a so that one could once
more obtain a response from the deprived eye.

690

We find, consistent with previous theory and experiment,
that most learning can occur in the LGN-cortical synapse, for
inhibitory (cortico-cortical) synapses need not modify.
Some
non-modifiable LGN-cortical synapses are required.
THE MEAN FIELD APPROXIMATION AND
ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS
The mean field approximation may be applied to networks in
which the cortico-cortical feedback is a general function of cell
activity. In particular, the feedback may measure the difference
between the network activity and memories of network activity.
In this way, a network may be used as a content addressable
memory.
We have been discussing the properties of a mean
field network after equilibrium has been reached. We now focus
on the detailed time dependence of the relaxation of the cell
activity to a state of equilibrium.
Hopfield8 introduced a simple formalism for the analysis of
the time dependence of network activity.
In this model,
network activity is mapped onto a physical system in which the
state of neuron activity is considered as a 'particle' on a potential
energy surface.
Identification of the pattern occurs when the
activity 'relaxes' to a nearby minima of the energy.
Thus
mlmma are employed as the sites of memories. For a Hopfield
network of N neurons, the intra-layer connectivity required is of
order N2. This connectivity is a significant constraint on the
practical implementation of such systems for large scale
problems. Further, the Hopfield model allows a storage capacity
which is limited to m < N memories 8, 9. This is a result of the
proliferation of unwanted local minima in the 'energy' surface.
Recently, Bachmann et al. l 0, have proposed a model for the
relaxation of network activity in which memories of activity
patterns are the sites of negative 'charges', and the activity
caused by a test pattern is a positive test 'charge'. Then in this
model, the energy function is the electrostatic energy of the
(unit) test charge with the collection of charges at the memory
sites

E = -IlL ~ Qj I J-l- Xj I - L,
J

(14)

691

where Jl (0) is a vector describing the initial network activity
caused by a test pattern, and Xj' the site of the jth memory. L is
a parameter related to the network size.
This model has the advantage that storage density is not
restricted by the the network size as it is in the Hopfield model,
and in addition, the architecture employs a connectivity of order
m x N.
Note that at each stage in the settling of Jl (t) to a memory
(of network activity) Xj' the only feedback from the network to
each cell is the scalar
~

J

Q. I Jl- X? I - L
J

J

(15)

This quantity is an integrated measure of the distance of the
current network state from stored memories.
Importantly, this
measure is the same for all cells; it is as if a single virtual cell
was computing the distance in activity space between the
current state and stored states. The result of the computation is
This is a
then broadcast to all of the cells in the network.
generalization of the idea that the detailed activity of each cell in
the network need not be fed back to each cell.
Rather some
global measure, performed by a single 'effective' cell is all that is
sufficient in the feedback.
DISCUSSION

We have been discussing a formalism for the analysis of
networks of ideal neurons based on a mean field approximation
of the detailed activity of the cells in the network. We find that
a simple assumption concerning the spatial distribution of the
pattern preferences of the cells allows a great simplification of
the analysis. In particular, the detailed activity of the cells of
the network may be replaced with a mean field that in effect is
computed by a single 'effective' cell.
Further, the application of this formalism to the cortical layer
IV of visual cortex allows the prediction that much of learning in
cortex may be localized to the LGN-cortical synaptic states, and
that cortico-cortical plasticity is relatively unimportant. We find,
in agreement with experiment, that monocular deprivation of
the cortical cells will drive closed-eye responses to zero, but
chemical blockage of the cortical inhibitory pathways would
reveal non-zero closed-eye synaptic states.

692

Finally, the mean field approximation allows the development
of single layer models of memory storage that are unrestricted
in storage density, but require a connectivity of order mxN. This
is significant for the fabrication of practical content addressable
memories.
ACKNOWLEOOEMENTS
I would like to thank Leon Cooper for many helpful discussions
and the contributions he made to this work.

*This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research and
the Army Research Office under contracts #NOOOI4-86-K-0041
and #DAAG-29-84-K-0202.

REFERENCES
[1] Bienenstock, E. L., Cooper, L. N & Munro, P. W. (1982) 1.
Neuroscience 2, 32-48.
[2] Scofield, C. L. (I984) Unpublished Dissertation.
[3] Cooper, L. N, Munro, P. W. & Scofield, C. L. (1985) in Synaptic
Modification, Neuron Selectivity and Nervous System
Organization, ed. C. Levy, J. A. Anderson & S. Lehmkuhle,
(Erlbaum Assoc., N. J.).
[4] Cooper, L. N & Scofield, C. L. (to be published) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA ..
[5] Singer, W. (1977) Brain Res. 134, 508-000.
[6] Bear, M. F., Schmechel D. M., & Ebner, F. F. (1985) 1. Neurosci.
5, 1262-0000.
[7] Mower, G. D., White, W. F., & Rustad, R. (1986) Brain Res. 380,
253-000.
[8] Hopfield, J. J. (1982) Proc. Natl. A cad. Sci. USA 79, 2554-2558.
[9] Hopfield, J. J., Feinstein, D. 1., & Palmer, R. O. (1983) Nature
304, 158-159.
[10] Bachmann, C. M., Cooper, L. N, Dembo, A. & Zeitouni, O. (to be
published) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.

