Here’s a really shiok prawn mee that has managed to evade many a listicle. I think part of the reason is that they are located in a semi-secluded neighbourhood coffeeshop and so its popularity is largely confined to fans within a certain radius.They serve the old school type of prawn mee where the sweetness of the broth is extracted from pork bones which have been simmered overnight.  Their pork lard is excellent and plays such a pivotal role in the overall flavour of the dish, especially if you opt for the dry version.   They use medium sized sea prawns that are farmed in Thailand which have a natural sweetness to them.  They are good but can’t be compared to the green tiger prawns used by Wah Kee.
The owner, Mr Goh, used to work for 58 Bak Chor Mee in his younger days which explains why his stall is named 58 Prawn Mee and why he also sells minced meat noodles. The pork ribs were sold out by the time I arrived but I was told they are really good too!  We tried both the dry and soup versions.  Both was good.  Their chilli is not overly spicy and complements the pork lard and shallots perfectly to produce a umami bomb!  4.5/5ConclusionA bowl of prawn mee soup worthy of your calories!  The dried version with chilli and killer pork lard is sure to satisfy that craving for deliciousness.58 Prawn Noodle Minced Meat NoodleYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Name * Email * Website Comment 



Yishun Park Hawker Centre Food Trail: Pokka No Sugar Tea PairingShrimp Prawn Seafood: Steelpot Prawn Vermicelli!SohGood Bak Chang:  As Good As GrandmaLuke’s Lobster Singapore Review

Home » Location » 8 CBD » Bedok Bak Chor Mee: Bak Chor Mee Soup in the City!
Like my Facebook page to get my latest food finds and recipes!Ultimate Durian Guide
Learn about MSW, D24, Golden Phoenix, D101, D13, D88 and other durians!Prawn Files
Learn about all the prawns in our local wet market!Sushi Files
Resource about all the sushi fish! Otoro, Chutoro, Akami, Aji, Shirodane........  Local Fish Files
Resource on local fish found in our wet markets
