Coffee lovers would remember Maxi Coffee Bar, that hole-in-the-wall hidden within Emerald Garden at Club Street. This was like your friendly neighbourhood joint, with people greeting you with a “Hi”, attracting many regulars working around the CBD and Maxwell areas.While the previous location was a small space, they have moved to a bigger outlet a short walk away at 6 Ann Siang Hill (where The Coconut Club used to be at) opposite The Corner Grill.Walking in, you would notice the calming medium-blue coffee counter, with baristas decked in coordinated denim wear. On that note of BLUE, I cannot help but notice that several new cafes in Singapore opted for various shades of blue for their interior, from The Wonderment Collective, September, GLASS Roasters, Narrative Coffee Stand, to Grace Espresso.Most of the patrons I noted would choose to sit outside to enjoy some of the cool breeze, and perhaps do some people-watching.While I visited during the early days of re-opening, it was considered quite packed and I needed to wait a while for seats despite being there early morning. In terms of food, there is an expanded menu such as Granola ($6); Kinda Plougman’s ($7, $13) with onion chutney, mature cheddar and soft egg; and Not-an-egg Sandwich ($8) which includes egg, preserved egg, chicharron on thick white toast. Recommended is the Field Trip ($7.50, $14) which is mushroom, marmite butter, dill and parsley salad on sourdough for those who would prefer something not so heavy-going with a cleaner taste. I had a Meat Me ($12) which was like a ham and cheese sandwich, but with mortadella which had a silky, thicker mouthfeel with a stronger taste of pork. The bread was beautifully toasted with layer of crisp, and overall rich and satisfying despite looking ‘simple’.Coffee offerings include a “Comforting” or “Adventurous” Espresso ($3.50, $4), White ($5.50), with the more special drinks being the Iced Cereal Milk Latte ($7.50), E&T or Espresso Tonic ($7.50), and the “Dirty” ($7.50). The Iced Cereal Milk Latte is their version of breakfast-in-a-cup, with blended cereal at the bottom soaked for that taste of breakfast, added with shots of expresso within.I would have imagined there would be some crunchiness within, but there wasn’t. Can therefore be a rather filling cup.Maxi Coffee Bar still continues to be that lovely neighbourhood place, where good coffee and friendly people gather.Maxi Coffee Bar
6 Ann Siang Hill Singapore 069787
Tel: +65 9776 7400
Opening Hours: 8am – 5pm (Tues – Fri), 9pm – 5pm (Sat – Sun), Closed MonOther Related Entries
Cupping Room Coffee Roasters Singapore (Takashimaya)
Kream & Kensho (Kampung Bahru Road)
GLASS Roasters (Faber Drive)
Parallel Coffee Roasters (Duxton Hill)
LUNA Patisserie (Amoy Street)* Follow @DanielFoodDiary on Facebook, Instagram and Youtube for more food news, food videos and travel highlights. Daniel’s Food Diary paid for food reviewed unless otherwise stated.Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

