
PROGRAMMABLE SYNAPTIC CHIP FOR
ELECTRONIC NEURAL NETWORKS
A. Moopenn, H. Langenbacher, A.P. Thakoor, and S.K. Khanna
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91009
ABSTRACT
A binary synaptic matrix chip has been developed for electronic
neural networks. The matrix chip contains a programmable 32X32
array of "long channel" NMOSFET binary connection elements implemented in a 3-um bulk CMOS process. Since the neurons are kept offchip, the synaptic chip serves as a "cascadable" building block for
a multi-chip synaptic network as large as 512X512 in size.
As an
alternative to the programmable NMOSFET (long channel) connection
elements, tailored thin film resistors are deposited, in series with
FET switches, on some CMOS test chips, to obtain the weak synaptic
connections.
Although deposition and patterning of the resistors
require additional
processing steps, they promise substantial
savings in silcon area. The performance of a synaptic chip in a 32neuron breadboard system in an associative memory test application
is discussed.
INTRODUCTION
The highly parallel and distributive architecture of neural
networks offers potential advantages in fault-tolerant and high
speed associative information processing. For the past few years,
there has been a growing interest in developing electronic hardware
to investigate the computational
capabilities and application
potential of
neural networks as well as their dynamics and
collective propertiesl - 5 ? In an electronic hardware implementation
of neural networks6 ? 7 r the neurons (analog processing units) are
represented by threshold amplifiers and the synapses linking the
neurons by a resistive connection network. The synaptic strengths
between neurons (the electrical resistance of the connections)
represent the stored information or the computing function of the
neural network.
Because of the massive interconectivity of the neurons and the
large number of the interconnects required with the increasing
number of neurons, implementation of a synaptic network using
current LSI/VLSI technology can become very difficult. A synaptic
network based on a multi-chip architecture would lessen this
difficulty.
He have designed, fabricated, and successfully tested
CMOS-based programmable synaptic chips which could serve as basic
" cascadabl e" building blocks for a multi-chip electronic neural
network. The synaptic chips feature complete programmability of
1024, (32X32) binary synapses.
Since the neurons are kept offchip, the synaptic chips can be connected in parallel, to obtain
multiple grey levels of the connection strengths, as well as
? American Institute of Physics 1988

565

"cascaded" to form larger synaptic arrays for an expansion to a 512neuron system in a feedback or feed-forward architecture. As a
research tool, such a system would offer a significant speed
software-based neural network
improvement
over
conventional
simulations since convergence times for the parallel hardware system
would be significantly smaller.
In this paper, we describe the basic design and operation of
synaptic CMOS chips incorporating MOSFET's as binary connection
elements.
The design and fabrication of synaptic test chips with
tailored thin film resistors as ballast resistors for controlling
power dissipation are also described.
Finally, we describe a
synaptic chip-based 32-neuron breadboard system in a feedback
configuration and discuss its performance in an associative memory
test application.
BINARY SYNAPTIC CMOS CHIP WITH MOSFET CONNECTION ELEMENTS
There are two important design requirements for a binary
connection element in a high density synaptic chip. The first
requirement is that the connection in the ON state should be "weak"
to ensure low overall power dissipation.
The required degree of
"weakness" of the ON connection largely depends on the synapse
density of the chip. If, for example, a synapse density larger than
1000 per chip is desired, a dynamic resistance of the ON connection
should be greater than ~100 X-ohms. The second requirement is that
to obtain grey scale synapses with up to four bits of precision from
binary connections, the consistency of the ON state connection
resistance must be better than +/-5 percent, to ensure proper
threshold operation of the neurons.
Both of the requirements are
generally difficult to satisfy simultaneously in conventional VLSI
CMOS technology.
For example, doped-polysilicon resistors could be
used to provide the weak connections, but they are difficult to
fabricate with a resistance uniformity of better than 5 percent.
We have used NMOSFET's as connection elements in a multi-chip
synaptic network. By designing the NMOSFET's with long channel,
both the required high uniformity and high ON state resistance have
been obtained. A block diagram of a binary synaptic test chip
incorporating NMOSFET's as programmable connection elements is shown
in Fig. 1. A photomicrograph of the chip is shown in Fig. 2.
The
synaptic chip was fabricated through MOSIS (MOS Implementation
bulk CMOS,
two-level metal, P-well
Service) in a 3-micron,
technology.
The chip contains 1024 synaptic cells arranged in a
32X32 matrix configuration.
Each cell consists of a long channel
NMOSFET connected in series with another NMOSFET serving as a simple
ON/OFF switch. The state of the FET switch is controlled by the
output of a latch which can be externally addressed via the ROW/COL
address decoders.
The 32 analog input lines (from the neuron
outputs) and 32 analog output lines (to the neuron inputs) allow a
number of such chips to be connected together to form larger
connection matrices with up to 4-bit planes.
The long channel NMOSFET can function as either a purely
resistive or a constant current source connection element, depending

566

FROM NEURON OUTPUTS

1 ??? 32

vG ______~~~----~~----_=~
~-.--a. ....

Ur-C~

/I6-A9

\

AOOR
OECOOER

SETRST

--------I

\

. .

ROW~V~
C~

.\
.\
.

S

? \ RST

R

. ::-Q

??????????????? ? ? 1 1
??
?

0

.

32

TO
NEURON
INPUTS

?

I L -----d I
6=. . . . . =a
AO-M

Figure 1.
Block diagram of a 32X32 binary synnaptic chip with long
channel NMOSFETs as connection elements .

...

~'

.

,,)

.,.

,"

Figure 2. Photomicrographs of a 32X32 binary connection CMOS chip.
The blowup on the right shows several synaptic cells; the "S"-shape
structures are the long-channel NMOSFETs.
on whether analog or binary output neurons are used. As a resistive
connection. the NMOSFET's must operate in the linear region of the
transistor's drain I-V characteristics. In the linear region. the
channel resistance is approximately given byB
Ro N

=

(11K)

(LIN)

(VG - VT H ) -

1 ?

567

Here, K is a proportionality constant which depends on process
parameters, Land Ware the channel length and width respectively,
VG is the gate voltage, and VTH is the threshold voltage. The
transistor acts as a linear resistor provided the voltage across the
channel is much less than the difference of the gate and threshold
voltages, and thus dictates the operating voltage range of the
connection.
The NMOSFET's presently used in our synaptic chip
design have a channel length of 244 microns and width of 12 microns.
At a gate voltage of 5 volts, a channel resistance of about 200 Kohms was obtained over an operating voltage range of 1.5 volts. The
consistency of the transistor I-V characteristics has been verified
to be within +/-3 percent in a single chip and +/-5 percent for
chips from different fabrication runs.
In the latter case, the
transistor characteristics in the linear region can be further
matched to within +/-3% by the fine adjustment of their common gate
bias.
With two-state neurons, current source connections may be used
by operating the transistor in the saturation mode. Provided the
voltage across the channel is greater than (VG - VTH), the
transistor behaves almost as a constant current source with the
saturation current given approximately byB
ION = K (W/L)

(VG - VTH)2 .

With the appropriate selection of L, W, and VG, it is possible to
obtain ON-state currents which vary by two orders of magnitude in
values. Figure 3 shows a set of measured I-V curves for a NMOSFET
with the channel dimensions, L= 244 microns and W=12 microns and
applied gate voltages from 2 to 4.5 volts.
To ensure constant
current source operation, the neuron's ON-state output should be
greater than 3.5 volts. A consistency of the ON-state currents to
within +/-5 percent has similarly been observed in a set of chip
samples. With current source connections therefore, quantized grey
scale synapses with up to 16 grey levels (4 bits) can be realized
using a network of binary weighted current sources.
Figure 3. I-V characteristics of
an NMOSFET connection element.
L=244 urn,
Channel
dimension:
W=12um

For proper operation of the NMOSFET connections, the analog
output lines (to neuron inputs) should always be held close to
ground potential. Moreover, the voltages at the analog input lines
must be at or above ground potential.
Since the current normally

568

flows from the analog input to the output, the NMOSFET's may be used
as either all excitatory or inhibitory type connections.
However,
the complementary connection function can be realized using long
For a PMOSFET
channel PMOSFET's in series with PMOSFET switches.
connection, the voltage of an analog input line would be at or below
ground. Furthermore, due to the difference in the mobilites of
electrons and holes in the channel, a PMOSFET used as a resistive
connection has a channel resistance about twice as large as an
NMOSFET with the same channel dimension.
This fact results in a
subtantial reduction in the size of PMOSFET needed.
THIN FILM RESISTOR CONNECTIONS
The use of MOSFET's as connection elements in a CMOS synaptic
matrix chip has the major advantage that the complete device can be
readily fabricated in a conventional CMOS production run. However,
the main disadvantages are the large area (required for the long
channel) for the MOSFET's connections and their non-symmetrical
inhibitory/excitatory functional characteristics. The large overall
gate area not only substantially limits the number of synapses that
can be fabricated on a single chip, but the transistors are more
susceptible to processing defects which can lead to excessive gate
leakage and thus reduce chip yield considerably.
An alternate
approach is simply to use resistors in place of MOSFET's. We have
investigated one such approach where thin film resistors are
deposited on top of the passivation layer of CMOS-processed chips as
an additional special processing step to the normal CMOS fabrication
run.
With an appropriate choice of resistive materials, a dense
array of resistive connections with highly uniform resistance of up
to 10 M-ohms appears feasible.
Several candidate materials, including a cermet based on
platinum/aluminum oxide, and amorphous semiconductor/metal alloys
such as a-Ge:Cu and a-Ge:Al, have been examined for their applicability as thin film resistor connections.
These materials are of
particular interest since their resistivity can easily be tailored
in the desired semiconducting range of 1-10 ohm-cm by controlling
the metal content'.
The a-Ge/metal films are deposited by thermal
evaporation of presynthesized alloys of the desired composition in
high vacuum, whereas platinum/aluminum oxide films are deposited by
co-sputtering from platinum and aluminum oxide targets in a high
purity argon and oxygen gas mixture. Room temperature resistivities
in the 0.1 to 100 ohm-cm range have been obtained by varying the
metal content in these materials.
Other factors which would also
determine their suitability include their device processing and
material compatibilities and their stability with time, temperature, and extended application of normal operating electric current.
The temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) of these materials
at room temperature has been measured to be in the 2000 to 6000 ppm
range.
Because of their relatively high TCR's, the need for weak
connections to reduce the effect of localized heating is especially
important here.
The a-Ge/metal alloy films are observed to be
relatively stable with exposure to air for temperatures below 130o C.

569

The platinum/aluminum oxide film stabilize with time after annealing
in air for several hours at 130o C.
Sample test arrays
of thin film resistors based on the
described materials have been fabricated to test their consistency.
The resistors, with a nominal resistance of 1 M-ohm, were deposited
on a glass substrate in a 40X40 array over a O.4cm by O.4cm area.
Variation in the measured resistance in these test arrays has been
found to be from +/- 2-5 percent for all three materials. Smaller
test arrays of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors on CMOS test chips have
also been fabricated.
A photo-micrograph of a CMOS synaptic test
chip containing a 4X4 array of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors is shown
in Fig. 4.
Windows in the passivation layer of silicon nitride
(SiN) were opened in the final processing step of a normal CMOS
fabrication run to provide access to the aluminum metal for
electrical contacts. A layer of resistive material was deposited
and patterned by lift-off.
A layer of buffer metal of platinum or
nickel was then deposited by RF sputtering and also patterned by
lift-off.
The buffer metal pads serve as a conducting bridges for
connecting the aluminum electrodes to the thin film resistors. In
addition to providing a reliable ohmic contact to the aluminum and
resistor, it also provides conformal step coverage over the silicon
nitride window edge. The resistor elements on the test chip are 100
micron long, 10 micron wide with a thickness of about 1500 angstroms
and a nominal resistance of 250 K-ohms. Resistance variations from
10-20 percent have been observed in several such test arrays.
The
unusually large variation is largely due to the surface roughness of
the chip passivation layer. As one possible solution, a thin spin-

Figure 4. Photomicrographs of? a CMOS synaptic test chip with a 4X4
array of a-Ge:Cu thin film resistors.
The nominal resistance was
250 K-ohms.

570

on coating of an insulating material such as polyimide to smooth out
the surface of the passivation layer prior to depositing the
resistors is under investigation.
SYNAPTIC CHIP-BASED 32-NEURON BREADBOARD SYSTEM
A 32-neuron breadboard system utilizing an array of discrete
neuron electronics has been fabricated to evaluate the operation of
32X32 binary synaptic CMOS chips with NMOSFET connection elements.
Each neuron consists of an operational amplifier configured as a
current to voltage converter (with virtual ground input) followed by
a fixed-gain voltage difference amplifier.
The overall time
constant of the neurons is approximately 10 microseconds.
The
neuron array is interfaced directly to the synaptic chip in a full
feedback configuration. The system also contains prompt electronics
consisting of a programmable array of RC discharging circuits with a
relaxation time of approximately 5 microseconds.
The prompt
hardware allows the neuron states to be initialized by precharging
the selected capacitors in the RC circuits.
A microcomputer
interfaced to the breadboard system is used for programming the
synaptic matrix chip, controlling the prompt electronics, and
reading the neuron outputs.
The stability of the breadboard system is tested in an
associative mellory feedback configuration,b. A dozen random dilutecoded binary vectors are stored using the following simplified
outer-product storage scheme:
~
s s
if L Vi Vj = 0
-1
Ti

j

=

f
10

S

otherwise.

In this scheme, the feedback matrix consists of only inhibitory (1lor open (0) connections.
The neurons are set to be normally ON
and are driven OFF when inhibited by another neuron via the feedback
matrix.
The system exhibits excellent stability and associative
recall performance. Convergence to a nearest stored memory in
Hamming distance is always observed for any given input cue. Figure
5 shows some typical neuron output traces for a given test prompt
and a set of stored memories. The top traces show the response of
two neurons that are initially set ON; the bottom traces for two
other neurons initially set OFF.
Convergence times of 10-50
microseconds have
been
observed, depending on the prompt
conditions, but are primarily governed by the speed of the neurons.
CONCLUSIONS
Synaptic CMOS
chips containing
1024 programmable binary
synapses in a 32X32 array have been designed, fabricated, and
tested.
These synaptic chips are designed to serve as basic
building blocks for large multi-chip synaptic networks.
The use of
long channel
MOSFET's as either resistive or current source
connection elements meets the "weak" connection and consistency

571

Figure 5. Typical neuron response curves for
(Horiz scale: 10 microseconds per div)

a test

prompt input.

requirements.
Alternately, CMOS-based synaptic test chips with
specially deposited thin film high-valued resistors, in series with
FET switches,
offer an
attractive approach to high density
programmable synaptic chips.
A 32-neuron breadboard system
incorporating a
32X32 NMOSFET
synaptic chip and a feedback
configuration exhibits excellent stability and associative recall
performance as an associative memory. Using discrete neuron array,
convergence times of 10-50 microseconds have been demonstrated.
With optimization of the input/output wiring layout and the use of
high speed neuron electronics, convergence times can certainly be
reduced to less than a microsecond.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology, and was sponsored by the Joint
Tactical Fusion Program Office, through an agreement with the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The authors would
like to thank John Lambe for his invaluable suggestions, T. Duong
for his assistance in the breadboard hardware development, J. Lamb
and S. Thakoor for their help in the thin film resistor deposition,
and R. Nixon and S. Chang for their assistance in the chip layout
design.
REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

J. Lambe, A. Moopenn, and A.P. Thakoor, Proc. AIAA/ACM/NASA/IEEE Computers in Aerospace V, 160 (1985)
A.P. Thakoor, J.L. Lamb, A. Moopenn, and S.K. Khanna, MRS
Proc. 95, 627 (1987)
W. Hubbard, D. Schwartz, J. Denker, H.P. Graf, R. Howard, L.
Jackel, B. Straughn, and D. Tennant, AIP Conf. Proc. 151, 227
(1986)
M.A. Sivilotti, M.R. Emerling, and C. Mead, AIP Conf. Proc.
151, 408 (1986)
J.P. Sage, K. Thompson, and R.S. Withers, AIP Conf. Proc. 151,

572

6.
7.
8,
9.

381
3.3.
3.3.
S.M.
ley,
3.L.
Sci.

(19861
Hopfield, Proc. Nat. Acad. SCi., 81, 3088 (1984)
Hopfield, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 79, 2554 (1982)
Sze, "Semiconductor Devices-Physics and Technology," (WiNew York, 1985) p.205
Lamb, A.P. Thakoor, A. Moopenn, and S.K. Khanna, 3. Vac.
Tech., A 5(4), 1407 (1987)

