Ramen Keisuke needs little introduction to ramen-lovin’ Singaporeans.They have opened quite a number of concepts such as Ramen Dining Keisuke Tokyo, Beef Sukiyaki Don Keisuke, Ramen Keisuke Lobster King, and Keisuke Kani King, Teppanyaki Hamburg Nihonbashi Keisuke Bettei, Gyoza King and Omurice Keisuke.Admittedly, some of the previous ones didn’t work as well. Anyone remembers the Tonkatsu or Champon outlets?Niku King which replaced the older concepts at Paya Lebar Square is inspired by its popular sister outlet in Japan – Niku Soba has 5 outlets across the country.When I visited early evening though, the queue was quite long and I waited about 30 minutes (or slightly more) before I got a seat.As “Niku” means “meat” in Japanese, that would include that the ramen will be topped and filled to the brim with more meat. However, diners who prefer the older concept still order from the sister outlet Tonkotsu King here. Niku King’s pptions include Niku King Miso Ramen ($12.90), Niku King Tonkotsu Ramen ($13.90), and Niku King Shoyu Ramen ($11.90). Add $1 to change to a spicy version.I must say that the prices remain friendly for its quality, plus complimentary eggs, beansprouts and water. (Finally some where which doesn’t charge exorbitantly for water, with frequent top-ups.)Comparatively, Niku King’s ramen broth is thicker, creamier with more umami as the meats used here are fattier and juicier.I found the tonkotsu broth generally smoother and milkier, but not overly salty. Can be jelat for some.The ramen noodles are thicker, larger, and curlier which I found heavier especially after it absorbs some of the thick soup. If you prefer the usual thin, long, and straight type, get the Tonkotsu King bowls.These come topped with stir-fried pork belly, available in Tonkotsu ($13.90), Black Spicy ($14.90), and Red Spicy ($14.90). The soup didn’t taste as rich and flavourful as Niku King’s, though I found it easier to finish up with a less queasy feeling.Look out for the exclusive side dishes only available at this outlet – Salmon Rare Katsu ($8.90) which is sashimi grade salmon, and Deep Fried Pork Chop ($7.90).The surprise find is the Keisuke Egg Rice ($3.90) featuring  fluffy scrambled egg-like blanket. Underneath that egg is imported Hokkaido rice topped with pork chashu drizzled in Keisuke Special Sauce.If they serve this eggy rice in a bigger donburi bowl with substantial meat in other future concepts, it would probably have quite a good take-up rate.Niku King – Ramen Keisuke
60 Paya Lebar Road #01-02/03/04 Paya Lebar Square Singapore 409051
Opening Hours: 11:30am – 3pm, 5:30pm – 10pm (Mon – Fri), 11:30am – 10pm (Sat, Sun, PH)Other Related Entries
Suparakki Ramen (CityLink Mall)
Kure Menya (Frasers Tower)
Kanada-Ya, Singapore  (Paya Lebar Quarter)
Afuri Ramen (Funan Centre)
Ramen Champion (Bugis+)* Follow @DanielFoodDiary on Facebook, Instagram and Youtube for more food news, food videos and travel highlights. DFD paid for food reviewed unless otherwise stated.Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

