Hola Amigos! We have another new discovery in the West, a 25-storey office tower called Vision Exchange at Jurong Gateway, supposedly to house more than 40 restaurants.There are still many unoccupied shops for now.Out of the couple of new openings, the casual Tex-Mex eatery Spaceout is the one that stands out most.  Casual Mexican eateries are still slowly gaining momentum in Singapore, with shops such as Barrio by Mex Out, Muchachos and  Guzman Y Gomez pathing the way. Boosting a bright neon signboard and eye-catching interior, it is difficult to miss Spaceout.With that said, they are still slightly disadvantaged since they are located the more ’ulu’ Vision Exchange, which isn’t one of the more frequently-visited or publicised places in the Jurong East area.They are also NOT that active on social media (2 likes so far on their Facebook).Well, good to know that everything here is said to be handmade from scratch, from the nacho chips, salsa and guacamole.  To add to the authentic Mexican dining experience, you can find Jarritos here –  Mexico’s 1st national soda, coming in flavours such as Sandía (watermelon), Toronja (grapefruit) and Limón (lime). They have a simple menu of 4 different tacos. An interesting choice would be Breaky Wakey ($5.90), a breakfast inspired taco with scrambled eggs, turkey bacon, potato puffs and cheese. When you order, they would ask if you want a corn tortilla or a normal flour tortilla, I would say the difference isn’t huge taste wise. But for health-conscious people, the availability of this option is a definitely plus point. The Chicky Taco ($6.90) had sauté chicken in home blend seasoning, which was spicy, but nothing too extreme. Their in-house “Gua Gua Guacamole” as an additional topping for the tacos at $1. I would recommend adding that scoop because the creaminess blends well with the entire taco, and makes it more substantial and complete. The Tangy Chicken ($7.90), containing chunks of grilled chicken mixed, pico de gallo and lettuce served in a taco, had a delicioso marinate for the meat. The Tortilla Chips ($4.50) come with one choice of dips, where you can choose between Pico de Gallo, Gua Gua Guacamole or Queso – basically cheese dip. The chips could be slightly too thick if you are the sort who love them light and crisp.For my dip, the Pico de Gallo was a great choice, especially now that I know they make it themselves daily. You could taste that this is homemade due to its freshness.Since there aren’t much Mexican food options nearby in the West, Spaceout could attract the younger customers working around the area.Its quirky interior, an entire wall plastered with pages of Archie comics – making it an Instagram-worthy backdrop, adds to the energetic vibes.Spaceout 闊
2 Venture Drive #02-48 Vision Exchange Singapore 608526
Tel: +65 8792 4005
Opening Hours: 11:30am – 8:00pm (Mon – Fri), Closed Sat – Sun Other Related Entries
Barrio by Mex Out (Vivocity)* Written by DFD’s Café Correspondent @__sy_g. Songyu is a food and travel blogger whose hobby is uncovering hidden hipster cafes. DFD paid for food reviewed unless otherwise stated.Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

