Alvin tells me that he was so enamoured with this one particular dish that he had made 12 trips to Bangkok over the previous 2 years to learn the recipe from a famous stall Bangkok. The owner didn’t want to share the recipe initially, but through his persistence he finally managed to get to persuade the owner to teach him the recipe.Having lived in Bangkok for 2 years, I havesay that this goong ob woon sen is the best I have eaten in Singapore.  Every ingredient has been meticulously sourced.  Alvin uses the Thai garlic which are small but very pungent.  The vermicelli is also from Thailand and the prawns are excellent quality.  Another key ingredient is the pork lard which is freshly made at the stall and he also procures the seasoning sauces from Thailand!  What results is a lovely pot of deliciousness that would surely transport you to the backstreets of Bangkok!  4.5/5The menu is quite limited, so don’t expect to be able to order all of your favourite Thai dishes here.  You basically come here for the goong ob woon sen and some side dishes and drinks to go along.  One of the side dishes which I would recommend is the moo ping (grilled pork skewer).  They don’t make their own, but Alvin had gone through many suppliers before picking this paricular one which is very good!  It’s nicely grilled but could have been even better if it had that charcoal smoke flavour!  4.25/5 ConclusionBest place to enjoy goong ob woon sen in Singapore.   The outdoor seating overlooking the Singapore river also makes this a good place to chill out!Disclosure
This was a mediatastingShrimp Prawn SeafoodYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Name * Email * Website Comment 



Sin Chao Gardens:  A Great Place for Teochew Porridge&JOY Dining Hall: Hidden Gem Japanese Dining at Great WorldChaoyang Prawn Noodle:  Prawn Mee, Teochew StyleYishun Park Hawker Centre Food Trail: Pokka No Sugar Tea Pairing

Home » Eat » House of Kueh:  Thin, Chewy, Slippery Soon Kueh!
Like my Facebook page to get my latest food finds and recipes!Ultimate Durian Guide
Learn about MSW, D24, Golden Phoenix, D101, D13, D88 and other durians!Prawn Files
Learn about all the prawns in our local wet market!Sushi Files
Resource about all the sushi fish! Otoro, Chutoro, Akami, Aji, Shirodane........  Local Fish Files
Resource on local fish found in our wet markets
