Another Korean lifestyle café opens in Singapore, except that this time it is not located at the usual Tanjong Pagar.Oh, Ang Mo Kio Jubilee Square.If you do not have kids to send to the various enrichment, Taekwondo, drums, music classes, then perhaps there are few reasons to visit the building. Oh yes, Collin’s.82Bunsik is a new Korean café located at the ground floor, with a full ceiling to floor glass panel attracting curious onlookers peeping in. It is an off-shoot of +82 PlusEightTwo at Rendezvous Gallery.+82 PlusEightTwo represents the country code for South Korea; while “Bunsik”  (분식; 粉食) literally means “food made from flour” – a term used to refer to reasonably-priced Korean food.The décor can be considered “minimalist” (horribly overused word – I am guility) or “simple IKEA” depending on how you look at it. (I know it’s IKEA because reading the catalogue is my only source of entertainment now, and the stickers have not been peeled off from many of the furniture pieces.)”Sell what? Corndog and Croffles?” It took a while because some customers who walked in realised that “Croffles” is a combination of Croissant and Waffles. Before people start thinking Croffles is a “new” thing to Singapore, it was actually introduced about 2016 (the now-defunct Costa 269 sold it) when Cronut, Cruffin, Crodo and what-have-nots sounded “cool”. Actually, they never really took off in a big way in Singapore.The Croffles cost $5 for a single (technically, this is half), $9 for a full double, while options of cheese, injeolmi and ice cream top-ups.Other items on the menu are Corndog ($4.50, $5), Ddeokbokki ($9.90) and Korean Chicken ($9.90). A Corndog is a sausage on a stick, coated in a thick layer of cornmeal batter and deep fried. 82Bunsik’s version comes with options of Mozza, Cheddar or Cereal, then coated with sugar, drizzled with ketchup and mustard.Complete with #cheesepull, the stick brought me back to Myeongdong momentarily, till I realised there was only half a sausage in the stick. Despite a rather small kitchen space, I thought that the Korean Chicken ($9.90) in sweet and sour sauce was decent. The pieces came with thin layer of crisp, tender and was piping hot. Except that the tossed sauce didn’t have character – it would be good stickier, sweeter, or spicier, or all of the above. If you come here during the off-peak hours, I would imagine it can be a quiet and cosy place to just chill and have some Iced Green Tea ($6), while people-watching the rest buying Western food at the S11 opposite.82Bunsik
61 Ang Mo Kio Ave 8, Jubilee Square, #01-13, Singapore 569814
Opening Hours: 11am – 10pm (Mon – Sun)Other Related Entries
Gerill Bab (Ang Mo Kio)
Kreams (Maxwell Chambers)
Hongdae Oppa (Plaza Singapura)
Burger+ (Clarke Quay Central)
Chir Chir (Bugis Junction)* Follow @DanielFoodDiary on Facebook, Instagram and Youtube for more food news, food videos and travel highlights. DFD paid for food reviewed unless otherwise stated.Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. 

